NAME:  titanic3
TYPE:  Census
SIZE:  1309 Passengers, 14 Variables

DESCRIPTIVE ABSTRACT: The titanic3 data frame describes the survival
status of individual passengers on the Titanic.  The titanic3 data
frame does not contain information for the crew, but it does contain
actual and estimated ages for almost 80% of the passengers.

SOURCES: Hind, Philip.  "Encyclopedia Titanica."  Online.  Internet.
n.p.  02 Aug 1999.  Avaliable http://atschool.eduweb.co.uk/phind

VARIABLE DESCRIPTIONS:
pclass          Passenger Class
                (1 = 1st; 2 = 2nd; 3 = 3rd)
survival        Survival
                (0 = No; 1 = Yes)
name            Name
sex             Sex
age             Age
sibsp           Number of Siblings/Spouses Aboard
parch           Number of Parents/Children Aboard
ticket          Ticket Number
fare            Passenger Fare
cabin           Cabin
embarked        Port of Embarkation
                (C = Cherbourg; Q = Queenstown; S = Southampton)
boat            Lifeboat
body            Body Identification Number
home.dest       Home/Destination

SPECIAL NOTES:
Pclass is a proxy for socio-economic status (SES)
 1st ~ Upper; 2nd ~ Middle; 3rd ~ Lower

Age is in Years; Fractional if Age less than One (1)
 If the Age is Estimated, it is in the form xx.5

Fare is in Pre-1970 British Pounds (£)
 Conversion Factors:  1£ = 12s = 240d and 1s = 20d

With respect to the family relation variables (i.e. sibsp and parch)
some relations were ignored.  The following are the definitions used
for sibsp and parch.

Sibling:  Brother, Sister, Stepbrother, or Stepsister of Passenger Aboard Titanic
Spouse:   Husband or Wife of Passenger Aboard Titanic (Mistresses and Fiancées Ignored)
Parent:   Mother or Father of Passenger Aboard Titanic
Child:    Son, Daughter, Stepson, or Stepdaughter of Passenger Aboard Titanic

Other family relatives excluded from this study include cousins,
nephews/nieces, aunts/uncles, and in-laws.  Some children travelled
only with a nanny, therefore parch=0 for them.  As well, some
travelled with very close friends or neighbors in a village, however,
the definitions do not support such relations.

STORY BEHIND THE DATA: 
This dataset is based on the Titanic Passenger List edited by Michael
A. Findlay, originally published in Eaton & Haas (1994) Titanic:
Triumph and Tragedy, Patrick Stephens Ltd, and expanded with the help
of the internet community.  The original HTML files were obtained by
Philip Hind (1999).

PEDAGOGICAL NOTES:
This dataset is ideal for teaching basic functions in S-PLUS in the
realm of Statistical Computing and Graphics.  It can also prove useful
in teaching binary logistic regression and methods of imputation, both
single and multiple.  The dataset is also useful for demonstrating
many of the functions available in Frank Harrell's Hmisc library as
well as demonstrating binary logistic regression analysis using the
Design library.

An interesting result may be obtained using functions from the Hmisc
library in S-PLUS

attach(titanic3)
plsmo(age, survived, group=sex, datadensity=T)         # OR group=pclass
plot(naclus(titanic3))                                 # study patterns of missing values
summary(survived ~ age + sex + pclass, data=titanic3)

REFERENCES:
Harrell FE.  "Predicting Outcomes: Applied Survival Analysis and
Logistic Regression."  Book manuscript available from the University
of Virginia Bookstore, 1999.

SUBMITTED BY:
Thomas E. Cason, Undergraduate Research Assistant
Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology
Department of Health Evaluation Sciences
University of Virginia School of Medicine
Box 600, Charlottesville, VA 22908 USA
Electronic Mail:  tcason@virginia.edu

----------------------------------------------------------------------
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT THE DATASET

1. For those over age 25 the mean # spouses/siblings is about .34 -
   seems a little low

The only explanation I can offer (without a deep search) is the
overwhelming "Third Class Bias" as I call it.  Many third class
passengers travelled alone... or some with friends... which is
not under the umbrella of the sibsp definition.  Also, many 3rd
classers were immigrating to the US... they were married... but
were sent off alone to establish a "foothole" and then later sent
for their spouses... if they survived... most did not.

2. For those under age 14 the mean # parents/children is 1.37 -
   seems a bit low

Again... not all children travelled with their parents...
especially in 3rd class.  Some children travelled with older
siblings... nannies... aunts/uncles... etc.  Actually, more often
than not... children travelled with only one parent.

-TEC


After further investigation... I found my initial instincts regarding
the low means to be correct.  There's not much else to say about it...
but I'll cite some unusual passenger cases that may come up in the
future regarding this issue.

Case #1:  Emanuel, Miss. Virginia Ethel... 3d Class... Age 5...
sibsp/parch=0/0
Boarded with her nurse Miss. Elizabeth Dowdell... escorted her to
grandparents' home in New York, NY.

Case #2:  Hassan, Mr. Houssein G N... 3d Class... Age 11...
s/p=0/0
Traveled with family friend Mr. Nassef Cassem Albimona... going
to visit his parents in American from Lebanon.  (Interesting
Note:  Albimona was from Fredericksburg, VA)

Case #3:  Ayoub, Miss. Banoura... 3d Class... Age 13... s/p=0/0
Boarded with 5 cousins... travelling to Detroit, MI to be
reunited with family.

Case #4:  Nasser, Mrs. Nicholas Nasser... 2d Class... Age 14...
s/p=1/0
Married to a 32 year old man... sibsp stands for spouse rather
than sibling... unusual at such a young age.  She lied when she
boarded the Titanic and claimed she was 18... however, her birth
certificate proves that on April 15, 1912 she was 14... not 18!

I hope this provides some insight to a few uncommon instances
where the definitions do not encompass the actual travel status
of a passenger.

There were only one or two instances of family members
"crossing pclass lines"... and they were included and counted for
in sibsp and parch.

-TEC